Feat: Data Plane reference (#1225)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/gateway-manager/data-plane-reference.md

content_type: reference
layout: reference
description: | 

>     Manage Data Plane nodes in {{site.konnect_short_name}}, including platform support, proxy access, version upgrades, certificate renewal, required parameters, and custom metadata labels.'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Manage Data Plane nodes in {{site.konnect_short_name}}, including platform support, proxy access, version upgrades, certificate renewal, required parameters, and custom metadata labels.
```

api_specs:
    - konnect/control-planes-config
faqs:
  - q: How can I verify that a Data Plane node is running?
    a: |
      You can verify a Data Plane node by accessing a configured route through its proxy URL. 
      By default, {{site.base_gateway}} listens on port `8000`, so a request to `http://localhost:8000/{your-route}` (or your custom hostname) 
      should return the expected response from your upstream service.

>   - q: How do I access services through a Data Plane node running on Kubernetes?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - q: How do I access Services through a Data Plane node running on Kubernetes?
```

    a: |
      1. Run the following command to get the external IP and port:
         ```bash
         kubectl get service my-kong-kong-proxy -n kong
         ```
      2. Find the IP in the `EXTERNAL-IP` column and use it with port `80` or `443` along with your route.

         For example, if the external IP is `35.233.198.16` and your route is `/mock`, access your service at:
         ```
         http://35.233.198.16:80/mock
         ```

>   - q: Can I choose a specific {{site.base_gateway}} version when using Quickstart scripts in Gateway Manager?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - q: Can I choose a specific {{site.base_gateway}} version when using quickstart scripts in Gateway Manager?
```

    a: |

>       Yes. Gateway Manager allows you to select the {{site.base_gateway}} version for your Quickstart scripts—except when using cloud provider scripts for AWS, Azure, and GCP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      Yes. Gateway Manager lets you select the {{site.base_gateway}} version for your quickstart scripts.
```
I don't think think we have cloud provider scripts anymore (I checked in konnect).

>   - q: Can I SSH directly into Konnect Data Plane nodes?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - q: Can I SSH directly into {{site.konnect_short_name}} Data Plane nodes?
```

>   - q: Can I SSH directly into Konnect Data Plane nodes?
>     a: |
>       No. Direct SSH access is not possible because the SSH keys are randomly generated and not exposed. 
>       To access nodes, use the cloud provider’s tools:
>       * [AWS EC2 Instance Connect](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-instance-connect-methods.html)
>       * [Azure Cloud Shell](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/cloud-shell/overview)
>       * [Google Cloud SSH](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/ssh)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - q: Can I SSH directly into Konnect Data Plane nodes?
    a: |
      No. Direct SSH access is not possible because the SSH keys are randomly generated and not exposed. 
      If you're running Data Plane nodes in a cloud provider, use the cloud provider’s tools to access the nodes:
      * [AWS EC2 Instance Connect](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/ec2-instance-connect-methods.html)
      * [Azure Cloud Shell](https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/cloud-shell/overview)
      * [Google Cloud SSH](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/instances/ssh)
```

related_resources:
  - text: Gateway Manager
    url: /gateway-manager/reference/
  - text: Dedicated Cloud Gateways
    url: /dedicated-cloud-gateways/
  - text: Serverless Gateways
    url: /serverless-gateways/
---

A Data Plane node is a single instance of {{site.base_gateway}} that acts as a proxy and serves traffic.

> In {{site.konnect_short_name}}, Data Plane nodes are managed by [Control Planes](/gateway-manager/control-plane-groups/). Control planes manage and store configurations in {{site.konnect_short_name}}, and Data Plane nodes are configured according to the configuration distributed by the Control Plane.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In {{site.konnect_short_name}}, Data Plane nodes are managed by [Control Planes](/gateway-manager/control-plane-groups/). 
Control Planes manage and store configurations in {{site.konnect_short_name}}, and they distribute those configurations to Data Planes nodes. 
Data Plane nodes don't manage their own configurations.
```

{{site.konnect_short_name}} provides Data Plane node installation scripts for various platforms. 

> These Data Plane nodes are configured to run in your {{site.konnect_short_name}} environment. Alternatively, {{site.konnect_short_name}} offers fully-managed Data Planes through [Dedicated Cloud Gateways](/dedicated-cloud-gateways).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These Data Plane nodes are configured to run in your {{site.konnect_short_name}} environment. 
Alternatively, {{site.konnect_short_name}} offers fully-managed Data Planes through [Dedicated Cloud Gateways](/dedicated-cloud-gateways/).
```

## Supported installation options

{{site.konnect_short_name}} supports the following installation options:

{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Setup Type
    key: type
  - title: Platforms
    key: platforms
rows:
  - type: Standard setup
    platforms: macOS (ARM), macOS (Intel), Windows, Linux (Docker)
  - type: Advanced setup

>     platforms: Linux, Kubernetes, AWS, Azure, Google Cloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    platforms: Linux, Kubernetes
```
Those might be supported but not via quickstart scripts. I imagine you'd have to figure those out yourself.

{% endtable %}

## Forward proxy support

{{site.konnect_product_name}} supports using non-transparent forward proxies to connect your {{site.base_gateway}} Data Plane with the {{site.konnect_short_name}} Control Plane. See the [Forward proxy connections](/gateway/cp-dp-communication/) {{site.base_gateway}} documentation for more information.

## Upgrade Data Planes

> Self-managed Data Plane nodes can be upgraded to a new {{site.base_gateway}} by initializing new nodes before decommissioning old ones. This method ensures high availability, allowing the new node to commence data processing prior to the removal of the old node. Managed nodes are upgraded automatically after selecting the new version of {{site.base_gateway}}. We recommend running one major version (2.x or 3.x) of a Data Plane node per Control Plane, unless you are in the middle of version upgrades to the Data Plane. Mixing versions may cause [compatibility issues](/konnect-platform/konnect-compatibility/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Self-managed Data Plane nodes can be upgraded to a new {{site.base_gateway}} by initializing new nodes before decommissioning old ones. 
This method ensures high availability, allowing the new node to start data processing prior to the removal of the old node. 

Managed nodes are upgraded automatically after selecting the new version of {{site.base_gateway}}. 
We recommend running one major version (2.x or 3.x) of a Data Plane node per Control Plane, unless you are in the middle of version upgrades to the Data Plane. Mixing versions may cause [compatibility issues](/konnect-platform/konnect-compatibility/).
```

To upgrade a Data Plane node to a new version, follow these steps:

{% navtabs "Upgrade" %}
{% navtab "Dedicated Cloud Gateways" %}

> Using both the `control_plane_id`, `cloud_gateway_network_id`, and the desired [`version`](/konnect-platform/konnect-compatibility//) you can use the API to upgrade a Data Plane node:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `control_plane_id`, `cloud_gateway_network_id`, and the desired [`version`](/konnect-platform/konnect-compatibility/), you can use the API to upgrade a Data Plane node:
```

<!-- vale off -->

{% control_plane_request %}
url: /v2/cloud-gateways/configurations
status_code: 201
method: PUT
headers:
    - 'Accept: application/json'
    - 'Content-Type: application/json'
    - 'Authorization: Bearer $KONNECT_TOKEN'
body:
    control_plane_id: $CONTROL_PLANE_ID
    version: 3.10
    control_plane_geo: ap-northeast-1
    dataplane_groups:
      - provider: aws 
      - region: $REGION
      - cloud_gateway_network_id: $CLOUD_GATEWAY_NETWORK_ID
      - autoscale: 
        - kind: autopilot
        - base_rps: 100
{% endcontrol_plane_request %}

<!-- vale on -->

> Kong performs a rolling upgrade of the fully-managed Data Plane nodes. This is a zero downtime upgrade because Kong synchronizes the Data Plane with load balancer registration and de-registration and gracefully terminates the old Data Plane nodes to reduce the impact on the ongoing traffic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{site.konnect_short_name}} performs a rolling upgrade of the fully-managed Data Plane nodes. 
This is a zero downtime upgrade because {{site.konnect_short_name}} synchronizes the Data Plane with load balancer registration and de-registration and gracefully terminates the old Data Plane nodes to reduce the impact on the ongoing traffic.
```

{% endnavtab %}

> {% navtab "Hybrid-mode" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% navtab "Hybrid mode" %}
```

1. Open [**Gateway Manager**](https://cloud.konghq.com/us/gateway-manager/), choose a Control Plane,
and provision a new Data Plane node through the Gateway Manager.

    Make sure that your new Data Plane node appears in the list of nodes, 
    displays a _Connected_ status, and that it was last seen _Just Now_.

1. Once the new Data Plane node is connected and functioning, disconnect
and shut down the nodes you are replacing.

>     {:.note}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    {:.info}
```

    > You can't shut down Data Plane nodes from within Gateway Manager. Old
    nodes will also remain listed as `Connected` in Gateway Manager for a
    few hours after they have been removed or shut down.

> 1. Test passing data through your new Data Plane node by accessing your proxy
> URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Test passing data through your new Data Plane node by accessing your proxy URL.
```

    For example, with the hostname `localhost` and the route path `/mock`:

    ```
    http://localhost:8000/mock
    ```
{% endnavtab %}
{% endnavtabs %}

> ## Data Plane Certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Data Plane certificates
```

> Data plane certificates generated by {{site.konnect_short_name}} expire every ten years. If you bring your own certificates, make sure to review the expiration date and associated metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data Plane certificates generated by {{site.konnect_short_name}} expire every ten years. If you bring your own certificates, make sure to review the expiration date and associated metadata.
```
